Added initial version of last-updated extension (#192)
homieiot/convention: extensions/documents/homie_last_updated_extension.md

# Last-updated timestamp

Version: **<!--VERSION-->1.0.0<!--VERSION-->**
Date: **<!--DATE-->17. Feb 2020<!--DATE-->**
Authors: **<!--AUTHORS-->Max Berger<!--AUTHORS-->**
License: **<!--LICENSE-->[CCA 4.0](https://homieiot.github.io/license)<!--LICENSE-->**

## Abstract
This extension adds best-effort last-updated timestamps to properties.

> Homie devices will publish a last-updated timestamp along with any property value changes. The last-update timestamp can be sent by devices or gateways that do not constantly pull data from the real back-end. In this case, they can report when they last actually updated the data, so that controllers can act accordingly, and maybe ignore old data, or display this information in an UI.

Reviewer: General style thing: Please break the whole article down to one sentence per line. The rendered output will be the same but this makes a few things easier.

> Homie devices will publish a last-updated timestamp along with any property value changes. The last-update timestamp can be sent by devices or gateways that do not constantly pull data from the real back-end. In this case, they can report when they last actually updated the data, so that controllers can act accordingly, and maybe ignore old data, or display this information in an UI.

Reviewer: I would suggest to start with a rationale sentence or even section, something like

> In most Homie application scenarios it is implicitly assumed that a property update on MQTT directly follows the real world event, e.g., the press of a physical switch would trigger an MQTT message and a controller would react to said message and turn a light on.
>
> This extension addresses the special use case of a Homie device in which the timeliness of an event can't be guaranteed or in which the exact timestamp of a value is of importance.
> Examples for such use cases are
> * ...

Reviewer: You sometimes write "last-update", sometimes "last-updated". I understand the incentive but this might be confusing.

> A common use case for this is a gateway software which publishes device data in Homie format, but actually uses external sensors to get the actual data. Gateways may re-publish the values the gather from the backend, even if these values are older. Using the last-update timestamp, a controller is then able to distinguish between actual value updates, and value updates which are just a republication of older values. 

Reviewer: 👍

## Homie Version
This extension supports Homie `3.0.1` and `4.x`.

## Extension Identifier

There are two extensions in this specification. 

The ID of this first extenstion is `org.homie.ext.last-updated`.
Therefore the **$extensions entry** is `org.homie.ext.last-updated:1.0.0:[3.0.1;4.x]`.

The ID of this extension is `org.homie.ext.last-value-updated`.
Therefore the **$extensions entry** is `org.homie.ext.last-value-updated:1.0.0:[3.0.1;4.x]`.

> A device may implement zero, one, or both extensions. The extension entries refer to the matching property attributes.

Reviewer: I suggest to add:

> A controller supporting the extension must support both topics

Reviewer: I would not separate the extension into two.
It feels rather confusing and both topics are for the same purpose behind this single extension...

## Extension Datatypes
This extension defines no new datatypes.

## Extension Attributes

### Device Attributes

This extension defines no device attributes.

### Node Attributes
This extension defines no direct node attributes.

#### Nested Node Attributes

This extension defines no nested node attributes.

### Property Attributes

This extension defines two new property attributes.

#### $last-updated

> The **$last-updated** property attribute is **optional**.

Reviewer: "Optional" renders the whole extension ambiguous.

Let's define the following: A Homie device may implement neither of the topics, one topic, or both topics. A Homie controller supporting the extension must support both topics.

With that the rule is simple and deterministic:
A Homie controller supporting the extension shall always evaluate `$last-value-updated` when defined, otherwise `$last-updated` and the property value.

If we agree so far, we can go one step further:
Both topics can be combined into one as the controller is able to parse which of the two formats is used and there is no case in which it actually makes sense for a Homie device to publish both formats.
Wdyt?

# Last-updated timestamp

Version: **<!--VERSION-->1.0.0<!--VERSION-->**
Date: **<!--DATE-->25. Jan 2020<!--DATE-->**
Authors: **<!--AUTHORS-->Max Berger<!--AUTHORS-->**
License: **<!--LICENSE-->[CCA 4.0](https://homieiot.github.io/license)<!--LICENSE-->**

## Abstract
This extension adds best-effort last-updated timestamps to properties.

Homie devices will publish a last-updated timestamp along with any property value changes. The last-update timestamp can be used by devices or gateways that do not constantly pull data from the real back-end. In this case, they can report when they last actually updated the data, so that clients can act accordingly, and maybe ignore old data, or display this information in an UI.
## Homie Version
This extension supports Homie `3.0.1` and `4.x`.

> ## Extension Identifier

Reviewer 2: There is something wrong with your extension identifier.  Assuming you intended the ID `name.berger.name.last-updated`, which seems a bit odd to me, the  **$extensions entry** should be `name.berger.name.last-updated:1.0.0:[3.0.1;4.x]`. 

I would suggest using a more convenient ID in domain format, like [your country code].berger.last-updated, but thats up to you :)

Author: Apologies, there was indeed a spelling mistake here. It should be name.berger.max in order to follow the convention of matching website-owner to id-owner.  (My personal website is https://max.berger.name/ ).

Of course, we could also use the homie identifier, but then this would seem like an "official" extension. Would that be preferred?

Reviewer 3: Very often the domain registrar is actually used to identify a purpose like "org" or "io" for public use / invented by public organisations or individuals vs "com" for commercial invented things or used purposes. That's how I see it used in the Java world at least. The reverse domain doesn't always actually exist.

Because the "name" TLD is not common I wouldn't use it here, as it is hardly identified as being a TLD. I suggest something like "org.berger.last-updated" or similar.

Author: changed id again

The ID of this extension is `name.berger.max.last-updated`.
Therefore the **$extensions entry** is `name.berger.max.last-updated:1.0.0:[3.0.1;4.x]`.

## Extension Datatypes
This extension defines no new datatypes.

## Extension Attributes

### Device Attributes

This extension defines no device attributes.

### Node Attributes
This extension defines no direct node attributes.

#### Nested Node Attributes

This extension defines no nested node attributes.

### Property Attributes

This extension defines one property attribute.

#### $last-updated

The **$last-updated** property attribute is **optional**.

If its used, it **must** follow the description below:

| Topic                                 | Description                                       | Payload type                       |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|

> | $last-updated        | Timestamp when the data was last updated from the backend / sensor              | integer: unix timestamp in UTC (seconds since 1/1/70) OR 0 for unknown |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| $last-updated        | Timestamp when the property value was last updated by the Homie device | integer: seconds that have passed since the Unix epoch (00:00:00 UTC on 1 January 1970) OR 0 for unknown |
```

to be more precise and use the official Homie terminology

Reviewer: Additionally: Why is 0 allowed? The use case is unclear and the meaning ambiguous (it's literally just 00:00:00 UTC on 1 January 1970)

Edit: See my longer comment below.

Also: I'm reluctant whether or not I care about the slight ambiguity. Probably totally fine

> Device usage:

Reviewer: "Device"?

Author: Rewritten to make it clearer

* The $last-update **must** always be published immediately before a value update.
* $last-update **must** be 0 or a positive integer

> * $last-update **must** be in UTC

Reviewer: Are these redundant?

Author: If they are, I prefer to be overly-specific in this case.

* If a device cannot get the actual timestamp for whatever reason (clock is skewed, ntp has not yet finished, etc.) it **may** publish 0

> * If a device has published a $last-update in the past and is now unable to determine the last-update timestamp, it **must** publish 0 at least once.

Reviewer: Is this different to unsetting the topic?

Author: It is hard to "unset" a topic in MQTT; we could publish blank or " ", but that would then not be a valid integer. Using 0 has the advantage that controller which don't want to interpret the value specially will have a valid, transformable timestamp. 

Added this to the doc.

Reviewer: Unsetting is technically possible. See "Delete": https://www.hivemq.com/blog/mqtt-essentials-part-8-retained-messages/

However, to determine that a Homie device uses the extension publishing any value to the topic (timestamp or 0) is the right way forward.

* the Qos and the Retained flags **must** match the value updates.

**Examples**
Assuming the base topic is *homie*, device ID is *super-car*, node is *wheels*, and the property is *pressure* then:
```java
homie/super-car/wheels/pressure/$last-updated → 1579965965
homie/super-car/wheels/pressure/ → 32
```

> This means that the property pressure was last fecthed from its source at unix timestamp 1579965965 (2020 Jan 25, 16:26:05 UTC, or 2020 Jan 25, 17:26:05 CET)

Reviewer: *fetched

Author: fixed.

> **Client considerations**

Reviewer: Who is this directed at? Please align "Client" to the Homie lingo

Reviewer: Also add how to react to value 0 here. That would probably answer my question from above.

Author: Added example, renamed to controller, added (hopefully) better explanation for the 0 value.

> Note that MQTT is not atomic, and does not guarantee any order. This means that even though both the value and the last-update timestamp are published together and in the oder above, the clients may receive these messages in any order, or one of them may be lost. Therefore, **$last-updated** is entirely **best-effort**. It **must** **not** be used for any critical operation.

Reviewer: comma after atomic?

Because of your argumentation I would actually not state any publishing order up top. If reception in a specific order can't be promised the controller can't act on it either.  Thinking about this some more I now understand one potential purpose of the 0 value. We could define in the extension that a controller has to expect an updated timestamp with every property value update as long as the $last-updated topic is set.

Author: changed to*should* above.
